# Root Cause Ananlysis

### Issue description:

The system encountered an issue while processing and storing patient details upon receiving messages published to the Pub/Sub topic, preventing the triggering of a welcome WhatsApp notification.

### Root Cause:

Due to lack of required log statements and unable to reproduce issue in the development environment, exact root cause couldn't be established.

However, based on the clues we suspect that a shorther timeout configured for Pub/Sub retries and the sending of ack messages after triggering WhatsApp notifications to the end user could be the possible reasons.

### Contributing factors:

1. Duplicate messages present in the pub/sub topic.

2. Ack messages sent to Pub/Sub after processing, storing data and triggering whatsapp notification.

3. Invalid patient data format.

4. Invalid or no prescription file present in Datalake. 

### Ananlysis:

As part of the initial investigation, we analyzed the notification and prescription application logs and found that the system was throwing "Request failed with status code 400" exceptions while calling the 'createPrescription' API and processing patient details. However, the logs were not descriptive and clear enough to draw any conclusions.

In the second step, the issue is recreated/replicated for one of the records that had failed when processing and triggering a notification in production, by creating identical patient and prescription details in the Dev Data lake system. And uploaded the prescription file into the GCS bucket to trigger Pub/Sub. Subsequently, the ePharmacy subscription module began listening and receiving messages published on the pub/sub topic and called 'createPrescription' API for file processing. It was observed that the system successfully processed the file, created patient, prescription details and sent notifications in Epharmacy Dev env.  

### Recommended action:

1) Pub/Sub retries timeout to be increased. - Datalake Team

2) Send ack messages to PubSub after receiving and storing published message in the database. - E Pharmacy Team

3) Provide detailed log statement before and after processing/completing each step starting from receiving messages from Pub/Sub untill sending whatsapp notification. - E Pharmacy Team

### Implementation plan:

1. Pub/Sub retries timeout to be increased from 10 sec to 10 minutes by Datalake team. 
   
   ETA - 4th Oct'23
   
   Status - Complete

2. Code changes need to be made to the ePharmacy notification microservice to send ack messages to Pub/Sub after receiving and storing published messages in the subscribe table.
   
   ETA - 5th Oct'23
   
   Status - Complete

3. Adding detailed log statement in notification and prescription microservices.
   
   ETA -  5th Oct'23
   
   Status - Complete

### Lessons Learned:

The investigation showed that the absence of proper loggers made it difficult to identify the root cause. To prevent such issues in the future, it's essential to set up and maintain necessary loggers,especially for key APIs, req/res to be stored in database. This will make troubleshooting easier, quicker root cause identification and better system reliability.

### Conclusion:

The increase in retries timeout in Pub/Sub and sending an ack message after storing the published messages into the ePharmacy database, has effectively minimized the occurrence of duplicate messages received from the Pub/Sub topic. Furthermore, it also led to a decrease in the gap between published message received vs whatapp notification sent to the end user.

### Approval and Sign-off:
